.TH ALFE 1 "May 2026" "alfe 1.0.9" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
alfe \- AutoLISP front-end driving clautolisp, BricsCAD or AutoCAD.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B alfe
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ FILE.lsp ]
.br
.B alfe
.B \-\-clautolisp
.RI [ options ]
.B \-l
.I FILE
.br
.B alfe
.B \-\-bricscad
.RI [ options ]
.B \-x
.I EXPR
.br
.B alfe
.B \-\-autocad
.RI [ options ]
.B \-\-dwg
.I DRAWING.dwg
.B \-l
.I script.lsp
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B alfe
is a single CLI front-end that drives an AutoLISP runtime against
one of three backends: the in-process or subprocess clautolisp
evaluator, or a CAD-resident engine (BricsCAD / AutoCAD) over a
file-IPC protocol. It accepts the standard option vocabulary
.RB ( \-l ", " \-x ", " \-i ", " \-\-dialect ", " \-\-host ", "
.BR \-e ", " \-E ", " \-\-no-init ", " \-\-no-color "), "
plus a handful of CAD-specific knobs
.RB ( \-\-mode ", " \-\-backend ", " \-\-dwg ", " \-\-epure ", "
.BR \-\-workdir ", " \-\-keep-workdir ", " \-\-timeout ", "
.BR \-\-bootstrap-phase ", " \-\-main ", " \-\-quit ", " \-\-dry-run ).
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Backend selection (mutually exclusive)
.TP
.B \-\-clautolisp
Default. Drive
.BR clautolisp (1)
in-process or as a subprocess.
.TP
.B \-\-bricscad
Drive BricsCAD via the file-IPC protocol.
.TP
.B \-\-autocad
Drive AutoCAD via the file-IPC protocol.
.SS Mode and variant
.TP
.BR \-\-mode " " \fI{auto,automation,batch}\fR
How to launch the engine (default: auto).
.TP
.BR \-\-backend " " \fI{attach,launch}\fR
Attach to a running CAD or launch a fresh one.
.SS Actions (processed in order)
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-load " " \fIFILE\fR
Load and evaluate FILE.
.TP
.BR \-x ", " \-\-eval " " \fIEXPR\fR
Evaluate EXPR.
.TP
.BR \-\-main " " \fIFN\fR
Call FN as the script entry point after loading.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-interactive
Drop into a REPL after the action queue.
.TP
.B \-\-quit
Force the engine to shut down after the queue.
.SS Dialect, host, encoding
.TP
.BR \-\-dialect " " \fINAME\fR
.BR strict " (default), " autocad-2026 ", " bricscad-v26 ", " clautolisp .
.TP
.BR \-\-host " " \fI{mock,null}\fR
HAL backend (clautolisp only).
.TP
.BR \-e " " \fIENC\fR
Source-file encoding (case-insensitive). Accepts
.BR \-mac " / " \-dos " / " \-unix " / " \-lf " / " \-cr " / " \-crlf
line-terminator suffixes. Run
.B alfe \-\-list-encodings
for the catalogue.
.TP
.BR \-E " " \fIENC\fR
Declared terminal-IO encoding. Accepted-and-ignored on the
terminal side (line-buffered by default).
.SS CAD-specific options
.TP
.BR \-\-dwg " " \fIFILE\fR
Drawing to open before running the script.
.TP
.B \-\-epure
Enable the EPURE plugin hook.
.SS Bootstrap and runtime
.TP
.BR \-\-bootstrap-phase " " \fI{marker,core,log,full}\fR
Truncate the bootstrap.
.TP
.BR \-\-workdir " " \fIDIR\fR
Override
.BR $AUTOLISP_WORKDIR .
.TP
.BR \-\-timeout " " \fISECS\fR
Per-action timeout.
.TP
.BR \-\-no-init ", " \-norc
Skip user init files. Honoured equivalently via
.BR $AUTOLISP_NO_INIT " / " $ALFE_NO_INIT .
.TP
.B \-\-no-color
Disable ANSI colour. Honoured equivalently via
.BR $NO_COLOR .
.TP
.B \-\-keep-workdir
Keep the engine workdir at end of run (do not delete). Honoured
equivalently via
.BR $AUTOLISP_KEEP_WORKDIR .
.TP
.B \-\-dry-run
Print the resolved action plan and exit 0.
.SS Diagnostics
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Verbose progress.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress non-error output.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-debug
Debug traces (implies
.BR \-\-verbose ).
.SS Informational
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-list-encodings
Print every encoding name accepted by
.BR \-e " / " \-E
and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B AUTOLISP_WORKDIR\fR, \fBAUTOLISP_WAIT_SECS\fR, \fBAUTOLISP_MODE
Defaults for
.BR \-\-workdir ", " \-\-timeout ", " \-\-mode .
.TP
.B AUTOLISP_BACKEND\fR, \fBALFE_BACKEND_OVERRIDE
Backend selector defaults; explicit
.BR \-\-clautolisp " / " \-\-bricscad " / " \-\-autocad
overrides.
.TP
.B AUTOLISP_BOOTSTRAP_PHASE\fR, \fBAUTOLISP_DWG\fR, \fBAUTOLISP_EPURE
CAD-side defaults.
.TP
.B BRICSCAD_EXE\fR, \fBAUTOCAD_EXE\fR, \fBAUTOCAD_ACCORECONSOLE
Explicit Windows CAD binary overrides. When unset,
.B alfe
searches the standard
.B Program Files
roots for BricsCAD, AutoCAD and
.BR accoreconsole.exe .
.TP
.B AUTOLISP_KEEP_WORKDIR
Keep the engine workdir after run.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable ANSI colour output.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
User script failure / unhandled condition.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error
.RB ( CLI-USAGE-ERROR ).
.TP
.B 3
Backend not available
.RB ( BACKEND-NOT-AVAILABLE ).
.TP
.B 4
Backend bootstrap or protocol error.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR clautolisp (1).
.PP
Full documentation as info pages:
.B info alfe-user-manual
or
.B info alfe-specifications .
.SH AUTHOR
Pascal J. Bourguignon and contributors.
.SH BUGS
Report at https://gitlab.com/informatimago/lisp/-/issues.
