.TH CLAUTOLISP 1 "May 2026" "clautolisp 1.0.52" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
clautolisp \- standalone AutoLISP evaluator and interactive REPL.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B clautolisp
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ FILE.lsp ]
.br
.B clautolisp
.RI [ options ]
.B \-l
.I FILE.lsp
.br
.B clautolisp
.RI [ options ]
.B \-x
.I EXPRESSION
.br
.B clautolisp
.RI [ options ]
.RB { \-l
.IR FILE " | " \-x " " EXPR }
.B \-i
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B clautolisp
is a Common Lisp implementation of the AutoLISP / Visual LISP
runtime. It reads AutoLISP source files (or
.B \-x
expressions, or stdin via the interactive REPL), evaluates each
form in a fresh runtime session under a chosen dialect, and exits
with a meaningful status code. With no
.B \-l
/
.B \-x
/ positional argument and no
.BR \-i ,
the REPL is the implicit default.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Input selection
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-load " " \fIFILE\fR
Load and evaluate FILE. Equivalent to the positional form.
.TP
.BR \-x ", " \-\-eval " " \fIEXPR\fR
Evaluate EXPR instead of reading a file.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-interactive
Enter the REPL after the action queue is drained (same context).
.SS Dialect
.TP
.BR \-\-dialect " " \fINAME\fR
One of:
.BR strict " (default), " autocad-2026 ", " bricscad-v26 .
.TP
.BR \-\-strict ", " \-\-autocad ", " \-\-bricscad ", " \-\-clautolisp
Shorthands for the matching
.BR \-\-dialect .
.SS Host (HAL backend)
.TP
.BR \-\-host " " \fIBACKEND\fR
.BR mock " (default) or " null .
.TP
.BR \-\-mock-input " " \fIPATH\fR
Feed the file at PATH to the MockHost as its prompt-stream.
.TP
.BR \-\-gui " " \fICMD\fR
Subprocess command speaking the DCL sexp wire protocol.
.TP
.B \-\-trace
Print every AutoLISP call (entry args + exit value) on stderr.
.SS REPL and diagnostics
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress the REPL banner.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print extra diagnostic information.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-debug
Debug traces, including CL backtraces on runtime errors.
.TP
.B \-\-no-color
Disable ANSI colour in AutoLISP value output. Honoured equivalently
via
.BR $NO_COLOR " (" https://no-color.org ).
.SS Source-file encoding
.TP
.BR \-e " " \fIENC\fR
Override the default source-file encoding for this session.
Encoding names are case-insensitive. Mandatory:
.BR UTF-8 ", " ISO-8859-1 ", " WINDOWS-1252 ", " US-ASCII .
Run
.B clautolisp \-\-list-encodings
for the full catalogue, including the
.BR \-mac " / " \-dos " / " \-unix " / " \-lf " / " \-cr " / " \-crlf
line-terminator suffixes.
.TP
.BR \-E " " \fIENC\fR
Declared terminal-IO encoding. Surfaced as
.B *AUTOLISP-TERMINAL-ENCODING*
to user code. The CL streams are not rebound at runtime — terminal
IO is line-buffered.
.SS Init files
.TP
.BR \-norc ", " \-\-no-init
Skip user init files
.RB ( ~/.clautolisp{,rc} ", " ~/.autolisp{,rc} ", "
.IR ~/.config/clautolisp/init ", "
.IR ~/.config/autolisp/init ).
Honoured equivalently via
.BR $AUTOLISP_NO_INIT " / " $CLAUTOLISP_NO_INIT .
.SS Informational
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version string and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show the
.B \-\-help
banner and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-list-encodings
Print every encoding name accepted by
.BR \-e " / " \-E
(mandatory four + every encoding the running CL implementation
exposes) and exit.
.SH "*AUTOLISP-…* GLOBALS"
clautolisp publishes a set of
.B *AUTOLISP-…*
globals in the running AutoLISP image, reflecting the CLI options
that launched it
.RB ( *AUTOLISP-BACKEND* ", " *AUTOLISP-DIALECT* ", "
.BR *AUTOLISP-VERSION* ", " *AUTOLISP-FILE-ENCODING* ", " *AUTOLISP-ACTIONS* ", "
…). See the user-manual for the full table.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LC_ALL\fR, \fBLANG\fR, \fBLC_CTYPE
Probed in that order for the default source-file and terminal
encoding when
.B \-e
/
.B \-E
are not given.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable ANSI colour output (https://no-color.org).
.TP
.B AUTOLISP_NO_INIT\fR, \fBCLAUTOLISP_NO_INIT
Equivalent to
.BR \-norc .
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.clautolisp\fR, \fB~/.clautolisprc\fR, \fB~/.autolisp\fR, \fB~/.autolisprc
User init files, loaded before any
.BR \-l " / " \-x .
.TP
.B ~/.config/clautolisp/init\fR, \fB~/.config/autolisp/init
XDG variant of the init files.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Runtime error or unhandled condition.
.TP
.B 2
File error (cannot open / read).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR alfe (1),
.BR read-autolisp (1).
.PP
Full documentation as info pages:
.B info clautolisp-user-manual
or
.B info clautolisp-specifications .
.SH AUTHOR
Pascal J. Bourguignon and contributors.
.SH BUGS
Report at https://gitlab.com/informatimago/lisp/-/issues.
