.TH READ-AUTOLISP 1 "May 2026" "read-autolisp" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
read-autolisp \- AutoLISP reader CLI: tokenise and parse files, report diagnostics.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B read-autolisp
.RI [ options ]
.I file.lsp
.RI [ ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B read-autolisp
runs the clautolisp AutoLISP reader against one or more source
files and reports parser diagnostics (lexical and structural). It
is the reader half of clautolisp with no evaluator attached — useful
as a syntax-only smoke test in CI, in pre-commit hooks, or when
isolating a parse error from a runtime error.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-strict
Use strict token mode (default; matches the
.B :strict
dialect).
.TP
.B \-\-lax
Use lax token mode (matches the AutoCAD / BricsCAD lenient modes).
.TP
.B \-\-warn-on-integer-overflow
Warn when an int32 literal overflows and is read as a real.
.TP
.B \-\-extended-string-escapes
Enable the implementation-defined backslash escapes inside string
literals.
.TP
.BR \-\-canonical-case " " \fIMODE\fR
.IR MODE " is " upcase ", " downcase ", or " preserve .
Controls how the reader folds symbol names.
.TP
.BR \-\-external-format " " \fIFORMAT\fR
Open the input files with this CL external-format
.RB ( :UTF-8 ", " :ISO-8859-1 ", "
.BR :WINDOWS-1252 ", " :US-ASCII ).
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print a per-file banner and a completion summary.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version string and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show the
.B \-\-help
banner and exit.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
All files parsed without error.
.TP
.B 1
One or more files reported a parse / lex diagnostic.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR clautolisp (1),
.BR alfe (1).
.SH AUTHOR
Pascal J. Bourguignon and contributors.
